Anomaly detection in time series
data involves identifying
unusual patterns or outliers
that deviate significantly from
the norm within a data set over
time.
This video explores how anomaly
detection in time series data
stored in CrateDB can be
efficiently executed using PyCaret
by leveraging its simple
and efficient setup to
automatically train and evaluate
multiple models.
In this Jupyter notebook, we
explore the integration of CrateDB
and PyCaret for anomaly
detection in machine data.
Our focus is on leveraging the
strengths of both tools, CrateDB's
ability to manage large
scale data sets, and
PyCaret's streamlined approach
to applying machine learning
techniques.
We will rely on the Numenta
Anomaly benchmark data set,
specifically temperature
readings from a machine room,
and demonstrate how to extract
data from CrateDB and apply
PyCaret's anomaly detection
algorithms.
The objective is to detect
anomalies that could indicate
equipment malfunctions using a
practical example that simulates
real world machine measurements.
As a first step, you need to
install the necessary
dependencies by running the
provided pip install command in
your Jupyter notebook.
For those using a cloud
environment like Google Collab,
remember to specify the absolute
path to the requirements text
file.
Once the installation is
complete, we need to import the
required libraries.
These include pandas for data
manipulation, SQLAlchemy for
interacting with CrateDB,
PyCaret for anomaly detection,
and various plotting libraries
for visualization such as Plotly
and Matplotlib.
Before writing data to CrateDB,
you'll need to adjust the
connection string variable to
match your CrateDB instances
credentials.
The provided code assumes a
local CrateDB setup but can be
easily adapted for CrateDB
Cloud or other configurations.
We will import the data into
CrateDB and once the data set
is successfully loaded into
CrateDB, the next step is to
access and aggregate the data in
a way that is most suitable for
anomaly detection.
Our focus will be on processing
the data into evenly spaced time
intervals.
We use CrateDB's DATE_BIN
function to group data into 5
minute buckets, calculating the
average value within each
interval.
Furthermore, the timestamp is
converted into Python date time
objects.
To better understand the
characteristics of our time
series data set and identify any
apparent anomalies, we create a
plot of the temperature readings
over time.
We also took record of the
periods where anomalies were
observed on the machines.
The anomalies represented as
blue shaded areas in our plot
include periods of planned
shutdowns and instances of
catastrophic machine failure.
We will use them later to
evaluate the model.
You can also see that there are
some unusual spikes in the data
which make anomalies hard to
differentiate from ordinary
measurements.
In the next step, we initialize
the environment for the machine
learning workflow.
This is easily done in PyCaret
by creating the
transformation pipeline with the
setup function and specifying a
session ID for tracing of
results.
Inspecting the available models
via the models function reveals
a variety of algorithms suited
for anomaly detection.
For our purposes, we select the
minimum covariance, determinant,
(or short MCD) model known for its
effectiveness in identifying
outliers.
We use the create model function
to instantiate and train an MCD
model, adjusting the fraction
parameter to specify the
proportion of outliers we expect
in the data set.
After training, we apply the
model to our data set to label
the anomalies.
The assign model function
enriches our data frame with
anomaly labels and scores,
facilitating the identification
of anomalous data points.
Finally, we visually assess the
effectiveness of our anomaly
detection model by plotting the
temperature readings over time.
The red spots correspond to the
anomalies flagged by the model.
This visualization enables a
direct comparison between the
anomalies detected by the model
and those initially observed,
offering insights into the
models accuracy and potential
areas for tuning.
Our exploration emphasizes the
potential for advanced analytics
in monitoring and maintaining
system health.
With the demonstrated approach,
we can easily create insights
into machine data and detect
anomalies with just a few lines
of code, enabling developers to
create new insights and
applications within just a few
hours.